Roadmap for 2019 (#2657)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-roadmap-2019.md

> If you’re familiar with the history of Rust you might be confused with a
> call to stabilization. After all, Rust 2015 (a.k.a 1.0) was all about
> stabilization and the team has actually done a pretty good job with achieving
> this goal. So what gives?
> 
> While Rust 2015 defined stabilization around language backward
> compatibility, it’s time for the language, the tooling, the ecosystem and the
> governance to stabilize. Each of these characterize stability in a different
> way.
> 
> - Ryan Levick, ["Rust 2019: Stabilization"](https://blog.ryanlevick.com/posts/rust-2019/)

> The Rust project has been growing like a startup for the last several
> years. This has some good aspect - “hockeystick curves” - but it has some
> very bad aspects as well. If this project is going to have a chance of
> sustaining itself in the long term, we need to get real about dealing with
> the organizational debt we have accumulated. I think we have serious problems
> at every level of our organization that need to be addressed, and I’m going
> to enumerate them from my personal perspective.
> 

> > - withoutboats, ["Organizational Debt"](https://boats.gitlab.io/blog/post/rust-2019/)

Reviewer: So while this was one of the posts that I saw a number of quote and at least for me generated a lot of recognition, it feels like the RFC covers very few of the issues, or in general, the topic of organizational debt. Adding back the core team section to suggest work on governance might help with that a little bit, but at least in my view feels like it doesn't give this group of issues the priority that it deserves.

# By team
[By team]: #by-team

With this general theme in mind, here are the high-level plans from each of
the teams for the upcoming year, in alphabetical order. These summaries are
based on discussions had at the All Hands; each team may also post a more
detailed individual roadmap. The summaries are meant to show plans in broad
strokes and how they fit together for the project.

## Cargo

The [cargo team 2019 roadmap](https://gist.github.com/nrc/6f0fb3b66d3b043aace30217128f3af9) identifies a few major themes:

- **Better support for cross compilation:**
    - Try to incorporate some of the innovations from tools like [Xargo](https://github.com/japaric/xargo), [cross](https://github.com/rust-embedded/cross), [Rustup](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustup.rs), and [WASM-Pack](https://github.com/rustwasm/wasm-pack) into cargo itself.
- **Focus on the cargo ecosystem by supporting plugins (custom commands):**
    - Custom commands enable faster experimentation, bringing new and flexible workflows to users sooner rather than later.
    - Make plugins more discoverable.
    - Provide library crates for parts of cargo to make it easier to create plugins.
- **Compile times:**

>     - Investigate ways that cargo can help to reduce compilation time, including potentially distributing binaries for builds from crates.io.

Reviewer 2: That would mean supporting binaries for a lot of targets (which is ok IMO).  There can also be a target "MIR" where people could build crates from the MIR code, saving some time in parsing/type-checking/borrow-checking*.  This could be done with a fallback mechanism: is there a binary matching my target? if not use MIR, if that doesn't exist as well build from source.

Reviewer 2: Of course there is the problem of conditional compilation (`#[cgf(...)]`)...

Reviewer 3: It also makes me a bit wary security-wise, but I guess that can be discussed at the time...

- **Addressing technical debt:**
    - There are a number of parts of cargo that could use refactoring, and we plan to spend some time on that.
- **Finishing "almost complete" work:**
    - Work on [custom registries](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/6589),
[offline mode](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/4686), and 

> [custom profiles](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/2007) is nearly done, and we intend to see those items over the finish line.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[improving profiles](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/48683) is nearly done, and we intend to see those items over the finish line.
```

There was some confusion on this.

## Community

The community team has decided to make "solidifying" the theme of the year.
While it has a lot of ideas of what could be done, a lot of existing projects
are useful and would be more so with more time and investment. Projects like
RustBridge, event support, the YouTube channel and modernizing the community
calendar will take priority.

Internationalization will also be a big subject over the next year. This both
means making Rust more accessible to non-English speakers and growing our
global reach. This will bring with it organizational changes to allow the
team to grow out of its current locations. It's hard to contribute to the
community team if you are in timezones incompatible with meetings in US/EU
timezones and the community team wants to change that.

## Compiler

The compiler team has five main themes of work for this year:

> - **Improving "core strength"** by lowering raw compilation times and also generating better code (which in turn can help with compilaton times)

Reviewer 5: compilaton -> compilation

Author: Thank you!

use an **incremental and demand-driven infrastructure.** To get the IDE
experience we truly want, we need to see that work through for the front end
of the compiler as well. However, this part of rustc is one of its oldest,
and there are significant design questions involved in how best to do that.

This is where the RLS 2.0 effort comes in. **The plan is to build a prototype
of the new front-end, thus enabling a truly first-class IDE experience.**
Wherever possible, we aim to share code between this front-end and rustc by
extracting libraries, such as [Chalk] (for traits), [Polonius] (for the
borrow checker), and a new library focusing on name resolution. Eventually,
we will merge this new front-end with the remaining bits of back-end from
rustc.

[Chalk]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/chalk
[Polonius]: http://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/polonius
[rust-analyzer project]: https://github.com/rust-analyzer/rust-analyzer

## Crates.io

One of the newer teams, the Crates.io Team is going to be focused on growing
itself, paying down technical debt in the codebase, and establishing themes
for long-term priorities.

> ## Dev Tools

Reviewer 2: Getting cargo miri to stable would also be great.

Reviewer 6: MIR isn't meant to be stable, so this can't really be done easily, nor do I think the MIR folks want to

(It's potentially useful to ship cargo miri with rustup on stable, though)

Reviewer 2: > (It's potentially useful to ship cargo miri with rustup on stable)

That's what I mean here.  (But my other suggestion in the compile time section would imply a stable (or versioned) MIR.)

The Dev Tools team has a few core functions:

> - liasing with the wider project

Reviewer 7: Maybe a typo?

```suggestion
- liaising with the wider project
```

- being a bit of a "commons" space for cross-cutting tools concerns
- finding out what needs are yet to be addressed by tooling and filling them
- providing some kind of quorum helping smaller tool subteams make decisions

They'll be working to fulfill these functions this year, along with looking
for ways to improve their internal processes.

> Individual devtools subteams may be coming up with their own roadmaps, you

Reviewer 8: How many dev-tools subteams do we want to enumerate here? For example, [i wrote out the roadmap for the Rustdoc Team over here](https://quietmisdreavus.net/code/2019/02/19/rustdoc-in-2019/#the-rustdoc-2019-roadmap), which was summarized in the [All-Hands recap post for the dev-tools team](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/all-hands-recap-tools-team/9546).

Reviewer 6: If you add it to the devtools repo I think we can list it here

Author: I'm not sure! It can't hurt to have it in the text, I think. I'm open to opinions!

Reviewer 6: Yeah. We can inline the text or just put it in the devtools repo and link it, either works for me.

Reviewer 8: I think putting it in the dev-tools repo and linking it here is probably best; since the IDEs roadmap is linked externally, adding a similar mention to rustdoc won't be too much of a stretch.

Reviewer 8: Update: The Rustdoc 2019 roadmap is now live [on the Dev-Tools Team repo](https://github.com/rust-dev-tools/dev-tools-team/blob/master/roadmaps/rustdoc-2019.md). I don't know if you wanted to post an edit yourself, or if you wanted me to post a PR to add it to this.

Reviewer 9: (The more the merrier, is my opinion)

Reviewer 6: This still needs to be added btw

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/steveklabnik/rfcs/pull/5

    - Create a [lang-team repository](https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/) to help track what is happening and how to get involved
- **Key ergonomic improvements:**
    - Async/await in particular is needed to help "unlock" Async I/O
- **Finish long-standing features:**
    - Rust has a number of in-progress features -- such as const generics, Generic Associated Types, and specialization -- that have been in development for some time. It's time to finish their designs and ship them.
- **Reference material and guidelines:**
    - Work with the documentation team on the Rust reference.
    - Produce "unsafe code guidelines" that describe what unsafe code can and cannot do.

## Library

The library team will be focusing on maintaining the standard library. The
team will handle specialized tasks such as overseeing and reviewing ports of
the standard library to new platforms, as well as typical bug fixes and
performance improvements.

The team doesn't currently have the bandwidth to take on a large number of
new features for the standard library, but is specifically planning to
develop a plan of attack for custom allocators associated with instances of

> collections (e.g. `Vec<T, A: Alloc>`).

Reviewer 10: cc @rust-lang/release Do we want to say anything here?

(also @rust-lang/infra is missing but y'all presumably have plans re. CI?)

Author: Both teams opted to not add anything specific.

Reviewer 10: @steveklabnik Well... at least for T-Release iirc we didn't really discuss the RFC itself... [more like the roadmap in general](https://paper.dropbox.com/doc/Release-Team-Roadmap--AY7UDwz3BXPr6nChsU1pxWenAg-ScEVi68FA0KmizLQpFe75); but we probably should do that next Wednesday. :)

Reviewer 9: I checked with @Mark-Simulacrum and @aidanhs and they both felt like they didn't want to add anything, but I'm certainly game to include plans that exist. =)

This is where the RLS 2.0 effort comes in. **The plan is to build a prototype
of the new front-end, thus enabling a truly first-class IDE experience.**
Wherever possible, we aim to share code between this front-end and rustc by
extracting libraries, such as [Chalk] (for traits), [Polonius] (for the
borrow checker), and a new library focusing on name resolution. Eventually,
we will merge this new front-end with the remaining bits of back-end from
rustc.

[Chalk]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/chalk
[Polonius]: http://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/polonius
[rust-analyzer project]: https://github.com/rust-analyzer/rust-analyzer

## Crates.io

One of the newer teams, the Crates.io Team is going to be focused on growing
itself, paying down technical debt in the codebase, and establishing themes
for long-term priorities.

## Dev Tools

The Dev Tools team has a few core functions:

- liaising with the wider project
- being a bit of a "commons" space for cross-cutting tools concerns
- finding out what needs are yet to be addressed by tooling and filling them
- providing some kind of quorum helping smaller tool subteams make decisions

> They'll be working to fulfill these functions this year, along with looking

Reviewer: For a roadmap, the approach of listing "core functions" and then saying the team will work to fulfill these functions this year seems a bit weak. Is that different from last year, and if so, how? If all the specific measurable goals are pursued by subteams, maybe this section can just be left out?

Reviewer 6: It is different from last year, last year the devtools team didn't really have these core functions. It somewhat implicitly did but didn't necessarily actively pursue them. We've only recently enumerated these and decided to start moving towards them.

I don't consider the roadmap to be a place for _only_ measurable goals.

for ways to improve their internal processes.

Individual devtools subteams may be coming up with their own roadmaps, you
can see the one of Cargo above, and the IDE team
[here](https://github.com/rust-dev-tools/dev-tools-team/blob/master/roadmaps/ides-and-editors-2019.md).

## Documentation

> The documentation team is going to be completely reformulating itself, and

Reviewer: Is the idea that the learning team RFC will still be in time for this RFC?
